Following the return from exile, leaders with contrasting views become prominent and by 200 BCE these differences of opinion led to the formation of several sects within Judaism. Within this shifting context, it’s important to remember that all Jews in late Second Temple Judaism held to a common set of beliefs and practices denoted by scholars as <b>Common Judaism</b>: 1) cosmic monism (there was only one god and those worshiped by others were a figment of their imaginations; they would eventually come to worship YHWH) and the corollary of aniconic worship (without images); 2) the belief that God rewards obedience and punishes transgression; 3) observance of the Sabbath on which no work was done, increasingly by assembling in synagogues; 4) circumcision of male children; 5) observance of the food laws (esp. refraining from eating pork); 6) reverence for the law of Moses and the Torah, which became canonical by 200 BCE.

Accelerated by the conflict which followed the Maccabean Revolt (167 BCE), when the Hasmonean victors consolidated the offices of king and high priest (ignoring the tradition that the high priest was a descendant of Zadok, the first High Priest of Solomon’s Temple), <b>Sectarian Judaism</b> came to consist of several groups: 1) the Pharisees who preached the resurrection of the dead and the importance of the “oral Torah” revealed to Moses along with the written Torah; 2) the Sadducees who were mostly of the upper and priestly classes and controlled the cult of the Temple; 3) the Essenes who separated themselves from society living a communal life of asceticism, voluntary poverty and strict observance in numerous locations (the Qumran community of the Dead Sea Scrolls is often considered founded by Essenes); 4) “Enochic” Jews who, like the Qumran community, rejected the Temple administration as impure and anticipated an imminent end-of-days; and 5) the Zealots (or “fourth philosophy”), and the related Sicarii (dagger-men”), insurgents who wished to overthrow Roman rule by force. In the early second century BCE, we can also identify the Hellenizers, Jews who found it convenient to adopt Greek culture and collaborated with the Selucid rulers prior to the Maccabean Revolt.

<b>Rabbinic Judaism</b> is the name given to the reinvention of Judaism following the destruction of the Second Temple by a group of rabbis heavily influenced by Pharisaic traditions, such as the oral law.  As they decried their inability to continue the cultic practices at the Temple, they focused on the correct interpretation of the Torah shifting from oral transmission to a written form (the Mishnah, codified about 200 CE, and the later Babylonian Talmud, 500 CE). 

In the period following Jesus’s crucifixion, many groups with wildly different theologies came to consider him the bearer of divine guidance.  Of these second century <b>Christianities</b>, Gnosticism and Marcionism were the largest and are considered separately.  Other groups deviated from the eventually-victorious “proto-orthodox” in various ways, many of them revolving around Christology: what was the exact nature of Jesus.  Docetists (docetism) held that as a divine son of God Jesus was only apparently human; an important corollary was that Jesus did not suffer on the Cross. A more nuanced version of docetism is called “adoptionism” in which Jesus was human but when adopted by God at his baptism became the Christ with divine powers (e.g., healing); this transformation was reversed on the Cross when Jesus said “Father, why do you forsake me?” Arianism (from Arius of Alexandria, 256-336) held, in opposition to the Gospel of John and the soon-to-prevail doctrine of the Trinity, that the Son of God was created (cf. “In the beginning was the Logos”, John 1:1) and distinct from God the Father (“the Father is greater than I”, John 14:28). Of course, all these non-trinitarian views were declared heretical.

The theology which became Christian <b>Orthodoxy</b> was finally settled at the Council of Nicaea in 325 CE: the Son was co-eternal with the Father having been “begotten, not made” from His same substance (consubstantial); the Holy Spirit had never been controversial.

<b>Gnosticism</b> is a category and does not refer to a single group or theology. It focuses on the widespread belief that the world was made by a fallen, evil God but that nonetheless <i>the elect</i> among men retained an interior divine spark which yearned to return to the good spiritual world.  This could be achieved only by applying “secret knowledge” which had been made available by the divine Jesus (i.e., most gnostics were in that sense Christians).  The gnostic insistence that the material world was evil and stood in the way of spiritual salvation reinforced the similar views of the neo-Platonist theologians. To the extent that the battles over which views would become orthodox were influenced by the number of believers, the very large number of gnostics may have been influential. 

<b>Marcionism</b>, from the second century Marcion of Sinope who preached in Rome, holds that the Hebrew God was an inferior, wrathful, and rather evil God (in part because he created this defective world) while the God of the New Testament was a loving, good God.  Accordingly, the Hebrew Bible was not considered part of the Marcionite canon which consisted of a redacted Luke (the parts reflecting favorably on the Hebrew Bible being omitted) and ten of the letters of Paul, who he thought alone had understood Jesus’s message.

<b>Qumran</b>, a location on the southwestern shore of the Dead Sea, is the designation usually given to the separatist sect of Jews who lived there and left behind the Dead Sea Scrolls.  They were intent on following strictly the law of Moses and focussed more than others on the concept of purity.  They had demanding initiation procedures, held all property in common, considered the administration of the Temple hopelessly corrupt, and had the most clearly articulated apocalyptic views (the expected two messiahs, a military leader and a priestly leader).


